# Description

Repository containing the data and code of the paper entitled “A state reduction approach for learning-based model predictive control for train rescheduling” published in IFAC-PapersOnLine, available [here](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405896325027417). Corresponds to Chapter 3 of the thesis (the part related to the results with state reduction).

This repository only contains the Python scripts and notebooks. The full repository with the dataset is available as the file "chapter3.rar" (folder "with_state_reduction") [here](https://doi.org/10.4121/277b2054-94e1-4d6a-b16c-db448bd8c4c5).

Acknowledgement: This research has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant agreement No. 101018826 - CLariNet).
# Setup    
  
This project uses [`uv`] for reproducible dependency management.  
  
Developed and tested on Windows 11 with `uv` version `0.11.6` and `Python 3.11.15`.  
  
Please install `uv` first by following the official documentation.    
## Installation

Download "chapter3.rar" from [this link](https://doi.org/10.4121/277b2054-94e1-4d6a-b16c-db448bd8c4c5), and extract the folder "with_state_reduction". Then run the following commands to install the necessary Python version and packages.
  
```powershell  
cd <PATH:project_folder>  
uv python install  
uv sync --locked
```

# Folders

data_optimal_old: contains the data for the training of the machine learning models (without state reduction). It consists of solutions of the mixed-integer linear program.

data_optimal_reduced: contains the data for the training of the machine learning models (with state reduction). In the following the naming of the files is explained:
- milp: data obtained by the solution of a mixed-integer linear program
- cl: data obtained by closed-loop simulations
- ol: data obtained by open-loop simulations
- N40: prediction horizon set to 40
Check the "rail_gen_optimal_data_reduced.py" for more details about data generation.

data_railway: contains the file "training_sets.npy" that stores historical data about the rail network used in the case study.

tests_ensemble_all: contains the results of closed-loop simulations of the proposed approach. It is generated by the "tests_learning_cl_ensemble_all.py" script, where the structure of the data can be probed.

tests_single_reduced: contains the results of closed-loop simulations of single neural networks. It is generated by the "tests_learning_cl_single.py" script, where the structure of the data can be probed.

training_data_old: trained weights and hyperparameters of several neural networks (without state reduction). Example: the file "milp_cl_N40_006_weight" stores the weights of the PyTorch model and the file "milp_cl_N40_006_info.npy" stores a Python dictionary with the corresponding hyperparameters. The last three digits in the name simply index the model.

training_data_reduced: trained weights and hyperparameters of several neural networks (with state reduction). Example: the file "milp_cl_N40_006_weight" stores the weights of the PyTorch model and the file "milp_cl_N40_006_info.npy" stores a Python dictionary with the corresponding hyperparameters. The last three digits in the name simply index the model.

# Files

analysis_test_single.ipynb: analyses the results obtained from "tests_learning_cl_single.py".

analysis_tests_learning_all.ipynb: analyses the results obtained from "tests_learning_cl_ensemble_all.py". The results from the paper's table come from here.

rail_data_preprocess_reduced.py: defines functions for data pre-processing.

rail_fun.py: creates auxiliary functions for data pre-processing, computing the step cost, and retrieving information from the system.

rail_gen_optimal_data_reduced.py: generates the data used for the training of the supervised learning approach by solving the underlying mixed-integer nonlinear (or linear) program. The flag "testing=False" sets the script to be run in a computing cluster. Alternatively, "testing=True" is used for local small tests.

rail_learning_cluster_reduced.py: trains the neural networks and saves the resulting weights and hyperparameters. The flag "testing=False" sets the script to be run in a computing cluster. Alternatively, "testing=True" is used for local small tests.

rail_rl_env.py: defines the railway network system (dynamics, parameters, etc...). It has a very similar architecture to environments in the library Gymnasium.

rail_training_reduced.py: creates classes which represent several neural network architectures, creates a function which updates the neural network weights by backpropagation, and defines auxiliary functions for data pre-processing and testing.

tests_learning_cl_ensemble_all.py: similarly as above, it tests the closed-loop performance of the ensemble of the selected neural networks. This script is more complete and it also tests the MINLP(10minutes), MINLP(with warm-start) and Learning+NLP approaches.

tests_learning_cl_single.py: individually tests the closed-loop performance of the trained neural networks.

tests_ntbk2.ipynb: notebook with several tests and experiments.

The uv project is defined by the following files:
- .python-version
- pyproject.toml
- uv.lock
